In the design of an automated teller machine (ATM), strong
consistency would appear to be the logical choice, but in practice,
A trumps C. The reason is straightforward enough: higher availa-
bility means higher revenue. Regardless, ATM design serves as a
good context for reviewing some of the challenges involved in
compensating for invariant violations during a partition.
The essential ATM operations are deposit, withdraw, and check
balance. The key invariant is that the balance should be zero or
higher. Because only withdraw can violate the invariant, it will need
special treatment, but the other two operations can always
execute.
The ATM system designer could choose to prohibit withdrawals
during a partition, since it is impossible to know the true balance at
that time, but that would compromise availability. Instead, using
stand-in mode (partition mode), modern ATMs limit the net with-
drawal to at most k, where k might be $200. Below this limit,
withdrawals work completely; when the balance reaches the limit,
the system denies withdrawals. Thus, the ATM chooses a sophisti-
cated limit on availability that permits withdrawals but bounds the
risk.
When the partition ends, there must be some way to both
restore consistency and compensate for mistakes made while the
system was partitioned. Restoring state is easy because the opera-
tions are commutative, but compensation can take several forms. A
final balance below zero violates the invariant. In the normal case,
the ATM dispensed the money, which caused the mistake to
become external. The bank compensates by charging a fee and
expecting repayment. Given that the risk is bounded, the problem
is not severe. However, suppose that the balance was below zero at
some point during the partition (unknown to the ATM), but that a
later deposit brought it back up. In this case, the bank might still
charge an overdraft fee retroactively, or it might ignore the viola-
tion, since the customer has already made the necessary payment.
In general, because of communication delays, the banking
system depends not on consistency for correctness, but rather on
auditing and compensation. Another example of this is “check
kiting,” in which a customer withdraws money from multiple
branches before they can communicate and then flees. The over-
draft will be caught later, perhaps leading to compensation in the
form of legal action.

Source: Eric Brewer, 'CAP Twelve Years Later: How the “Rules” Have Changed'
